# Development

## Within containers

If you are using GitHub Codespaces or Visual Studio Code and you have Docker installed,
just open this repository in VS code. We've preconfigured everything for you, so that you can
start code quite easily. :3

## Local development

In order to work on _Mahlzeit_, several tools are required:

- Go 1.20 compiler or newer (since the application is written in Go)
- [sqlc](https://sqlc.dev) for code-generation of SQL queries
- [dbmate](https://github.com/amacneil/dbmate) for our migrations.
- [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) for the web development.

Optional, but recommended:

- `docker compose` for quickly spinning up development databases
- [direnv](https://direnv.net/)
- [air](https://github.com/cosmtrek/air)

## Working on templates

In order to work with the templates and their styling, we need `npm` set up. We aim to remove it at a later
stage, but for now, it's easier to work with it and the [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) ecosystem.

In order to start Vite and enabling on-the-fly compilation for CSS/JS assets, open a terminal and run:

```shell
$ cd web
$ npm install
$ npm start
```

This starts the "asset server" on port 5173, which is then injected into the templates with
the [manifest.partial.tmpl](./web/templates/partials/manifest.partial.tmpl).

## Building the application

In order to build the application, we need to generate the assets first:

```shell
$ go generate ./web
```

After that, we can build the application using the usual `go build` command:

```shell
$ go build ./cmd/mahlzeit
```

This outputs a binary called `mahlzeit`. Because the compiled assets are not embedded into the binary at this moment,
they need to be copied along with the binary. Example:

```shell
$ export app_dir=$(mktemp -d) # create a new temporary directory
$ mv ./mahlzeit $app_dir      # copy the binary to the dir 
$ mv ./web/assets/ $app_dir/  # copy the compiled assets
```

We are working to improve the experience for that, so that you only need to copy the binary.

---

The files in the repository are prepared for the development with `docker compose`. In order to start the application,
we need to create the database and after that we're ready to go!

```shell
$ docker compose up -d  # creating the database container
$ dbmate --wait up      # applying the migrations
$ go run ./cmd/mahlzeit # starting the application
```

Now *Mahlzeit* is starting and reachable on [localhost:4000](http://localhost:4000/)!

### Hot code reload

We use air to automatically restart mahlzeit when code changes. 

To start the server with air, just run `air` in the project root directory. 

## Working with the database

### Creating the test database

Once `dbmate` is installed, you can spin up an empty database with `dbmate up`. As of today, there's no seed data
available, but we aim to provide it in the future.

### Adding a new migration

`dbmate` is also used for creating new migrations. Assuming we want to create a migration for adding a new table, e.g.
for recipe utensils, we might do it the following way:

1. Create a new migration with a descriptive name. `dbmate new add-utensils-table`
2. Open the new migration file: `editor db/migrations/*-add-utensils-table.sql`
3. Fill the file with the following content:

   ```sql
   -- migrate:up
   create table utensils
   (
       id   bigint primary key generated by default as identity,
       name text not null
   );
   
   -- migrate:down
   drop table utensils;
   ```
4. Apply the new migration by running `dbmate up`. The `schema.sql` should be updated automatically afterwards.
5. Done!

### Recommendations for new migrations

1. Use `bigint` for the identifier.
   Although we might never reach the limit of 4-byte length integers, it's better to be prepared.
2. Use `not null` where possible. Working with nullables or `nil` in Go can be a pain, so try to avoid nullable values.
   It's recommended to set it to `not null` with a default value.
3. Use lowercase SQL. It's just a preference, but it's consistent with the rest of the project.
